# AI art

It's hated by most and loved by a lot; it's complicated.

This is a really good video on the topic, actually: <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ztv7iL9RDe0>. Watch it, not for the
trick it provides, but for the essay. (The trick: Add `before:2023` to your searches.)

## Opinions

I have opinions on AI art.  I think it is a good development that it happens, but that does not mean I like the way it
exists now.

## My Online Comments

This is a collection of comments I've made in relation to AI art that I stand by.

### AI art in a fan-art competition

Preface: Other comments have convinced me that art competitions in general are bad. This is my opinion of AI-art if such
situations do arise anyway.

I do not agree with a blanket ban on AI art for multiple reasons, but it should always be clear when it has been used.
Checking pieces for originality is definitely a must.  (Copying note: this was a reply to a comment that also mentioned
tracing and stealing artwork in general.)

My reason for not disregarding all AI art is that it can still take a lot of work. Most pieces made with AI look good on
first glance, but quickly fall apart once you check them out longer. (And not just because of missing fingers or weird
backgrounds, which will at some point not be obvious anymore.) An artist that draws everything themselves will generally
know why they've made certain decisions, someone that simply types a prompt and hopes for a good outcome cannot explain
anything. This is something you unconsciously pick up on. However, if an AI artist keeps refining the same piece using
image-to-image or with controlnets, that requires a lot more thought and effort. Additionally, there are artists that
then touch up the final result even slightly more. I do not believe that just because these artists use a tool made from
stolen art that their art is stolen or bad. I do understand that it feels unfair when people use AI to generate art, and
it's unfortunate when people try to hide their usage of it.

I kind of recommend everyone to at least try to generate a piece they'd be happy with to see how little AI right now
actually understands art. I've never succeeded in it so far.

#### Updated thoughts on this matter

My thoughts on the matter keep evolving so, while I stand by it for now, I want to add additional thoughts without
changing my original comment.  Refining with image-to-image is still not really useful, I get I was simplifying, but
it's not really a holy grail for image generation like I made it out to be.  To truly make good use of the art, you need
skill in drawing yourself.  Not to trace what the AI did, but to redo it.  There's also a lot to be said about using AI
for sketching quickly, although I have not seen much about that, nor tried it.  When I say “unfortunate when people try
to hid their usage of (AI generated art),” what I mean is “it sucks that people hide it, but also sucks that they feel
like they need to in order to be taken seriously.” The “something you unconsciously pick up on” has a name: **intent**.
It is surprisingly easy to feel intent of a piece of art, or at least, whether the parts that make up the image were
drawn for a reason.  Right now, image generation does not have that ability, and in its current form cannot by
definition.
