# Artificial Intelligence

There is an awful lot to say about Artificial Intelligence.  Many people don't understand how common and advanced AI is
in their every day life, while at the same time over-estimating the capabalities in visible cases.  Researchers aren't
always on the same page about it either, because it's difficult to give a satisfying answer that encompasses only things
that _feel_ like AI. (Actually, try doing that for a chair, that's difficult too.)

## Definition

I know how boring it is to start with a definition, but I hope to show why it's difficult ot define AI, as I think that
already gives a lot of insight.  Traditionally, we used “[expert systems]” that make decision based on rules created in
cooperation with experts in different fields.  Do you think that following a predeterimined path based on a set of rules
is intelligence?  If yes, where do the rules become too simple: Is a fridge that turns on its light when the door is
open still intelligent?  If no, when does intelligence start: Neural networks—based on how the brain functions—are also
created by following a set of mathematical rules; they only work together in a way that we cannot always explain, are
they intelligent?

### The “Chinese room” thought experiment

There is this interesting thought experiment that even questions intelligence in its entirety: The Chinese room
experiment.  Suppose you are locked in a room with only a large rule book and nothing else.  Every day, you get a letter
that's written in Chinese and which you cannot understand.  (If you speak Mandarin, suppose the letter is in Tagalog.)
Your goal is to send a response to the letter that you send back at the end of the day.  Since you do not speak Chinese,
you refer to the rule book to create the response.  For someone outside the room, it will seem like you understand
Chinese perfectly and can write flawless responses.  Still, we would not say that you understand the letters.  But now
suppose that instead of a human in the room, there is a powerful computer in the room that also has access to this same
book with rules.  Then the computer can also create sensical responses each day that convince Chinese speakers that the
computer understands Chinese.  But finally, if we do put in a native Chinese then we suddenly are certain they
understand the letters.  On the outside, nothing has changed, so we just cannot tell whether or not there is
understanding.  If we use this as a very reasonable proxy for intelligence, then the Chinese room experiment shows us
that it is not possible to (dis)count a system of its intelligence simply because we fell like it should or shouldn't
have intelligence.

## Controversy

There is a lot of controversy surrounding different AI systems, a lot because the systems are rapidly evolving and
humans nor laws can keep up.  Take copyright infringement problems with Stable Diffusion and other AI generated art or
code attribution with GitHub Copilot.  And then there's deepfakes that are very problematic for e.g. political figures
and famous people.

[expert systems]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Expert_system
